CS 377P: Programming for Performance
Assignment 6: Matrix Multiplication with CUDA
Due date: April 27th, 2026, 9:00 PM

The goal of this assignment is to implement several CUDA kernels for N X N matrix
multiplication and use NVIDIA Nsight Compute to understand GPU performance behavior.
You will write a different kernel for each task and compare the execution time of
the different matrix multiplication implementations. We provide the skeleton code
matmul_sample.cu here. You will use TACC Lonestar GPU node, and the access guideline
is here.

Use several matrix sizes for evaluation, including at least one large matrix size up
to ​10,000 × 10,000​. You do not need to present results for every matrix size you test;
presenting results for a few representative small sizes and one large size is sufficient.

Task 1
Start by running matrix multiplication with a ​single thread​. To run the kernel with only
one thread, use kernel launch parameters <<<1, 1>>>. Measure the execution time of this
single-thread kernel. The skeleton code shows how to measure execution time of CUDA
programs.

Task 2
Write a kernel in which ​each thread computes one element of the output matrix​. We call
this version naive matrix multiplication because it does not include any memory
optimizations. To run the kernel, use kernel launch parameters <<<num_blocks,
num_threads>>>. Measure the execution time of this kernel.

Task 3
Implement ​tiled matrix multiplication using shared memory​. Refer to slide 52 from the
course slides. Run the tiled kernel with different tile sizes, such as ​8, 16​ and ​32​,
and measure the execution time for each version separately. Draw a graph comparing the
performance of the different tile sizes, and explain the observed behavior. Your plot
should have a different line for each matrix size. What is the best speedup you obtain
for the 10k x 10k matrix?

Task 4
Use the profiling tool NVIDIA Nsight Compute (NCU) to study the performance behavior
of your matrix multiplication kernels. Use the following command to profile your program:

  module load cuda
  ncu --section SpeedOfLight ./program

This command collects a summary including compute-related and memory-related throughput
information. Nsight Compute CLI supports profiling from the command line using sections
such as SpeedOfLight.
Report the following metrics:

  Memory [%]
  Compute (SM) [%]

Compare these metrics across:
- naive matrix multiplication
- tiled matrix multiplication with different tile sizes
Explain why memory throughput and SM throughput change as tile size increases. Does Memory
[%] continue to increase as tile size grows? If not, explain why.

You may also consult the official Nsight Compute documentation and explore additional metrics,
such as shared-memory behavior, L2 cache behavior, and other relevant profiling results.
Nsight Compute’s profiling documentation includes memory workload analysis and other detailed
sections for this purpose.

Report
Write a report (PDF) summarizing your implementation and conclusions from your experiments.
Submit both your code and report in Canvas. Please write how many hours you spent on this assignment.
