CS 377P: Programming for Performance
Assignment 5: Shared-memory parallel programming (II)
Due date: April 10th, 2026, 9:00 PM

In this assignment, you will implement a pThreads program to perform the
partitioning step in Quicksort in parallel. Recall that the partitioning step
can become the bottleneck if it is done sequentially, even if the two recursive
calls to Quicksort are executed in parallel. Parallelizing the partitioning step
is nontrivial but as discussed in class, it can be done using the filter
data-parallel operator, which in turn is implemented in parallel using the scan
data-parallel operator. Read the entire assignment before starting to write your
programs since the different parts build on each other.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1) Sequential partitioning implementation:

  - Write a sequential program that implements the partition function in
    Quicksort. Use the median-of-three rule for selecting the pivot and allocate
    a new array to store the input array values after partitioning since that is
    what you will do in the parallel implementation.
  - Input array:
      - Element type: long
      - Array sizes: 1K (1024), 10K, 100K, 1M, 10M
      - Array element values: use this sequence [1,-2,3,-4,5,.....]
           
What to turn in: (i) your code, (ii) a table with execution times for different
array sizes, and (iii) a log-log plot of execution times vs. array sizes.

2) Parallel  partitioning using two filters:

  - Write a pThreads program to implement the partition function in parallel. As
    we discussed in lecture, this can be implemented using two filters, where
    the first filter collects all the array elements less than the pivot, and
    the second filter collects all the elements greater than the pivot, writing
    all of them into the auxiliary array. The filter operation can in turn be
    implemented using map and scan. You should allocate a new array to store the
    input array values after partitioning. Run your parallel partition
    implementation on the same arrays as above, and measure the execution time
    for thread counts of 1,2,4,8,16,32.

What to turn in: (i) a short description of your approach, (ii) your code, (iii)
a table with the execution times for all array sizes and thread counts, and (iv)
a single graph in which the x-axis is the thread count and the y-axis is the
speedup, and in which there is a separate speedup curve for each array size.
Measure speedup with respect to the execution time of your sequential
implementation.

3) Parallel partitioning using a single filter:

  - As we discussed in lecture, the partition function can be implemented using
    a single filter. Repeat part (2)  using a single filter to perform
    partitioning.

What to turn in: same as in the previous part.


4) Report: write a short report (one page) summarizing your implementation and
conclusions from your experiments.

