CS 377P: Programming for Performance
Assignment 4: Shared-memory parallel programming
Due date: April 3rd, 2026, 9:00 PM

In this assignment, you will implement parallel programs to compute an
approximation to pi using the numerical integration program discussed in class.
You will implement several variations of this program to understand factors that
affect performance in shared-memory programs. Read the entire assignment before
starting work since you will be incrementally changing your code in each section
of the assignment, and it will be useful to see the overall structure of what
you are being asked to do.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Numerical integration to compute an estimate for pi:

  - A sequential program for performing the numerical integration is available
    here. It is an adaptation of the code I showed you in class. The code
    includes some header files that you will need in the rest of the assignment.
    Read this code and run it. It prints the estimate for pi and the running
    time in nanoseconds. 
    What to turn in:
      - Use your knowledge of basic calculus to explain briefly why this code
        provides an estimate for pi.
  - In the rest of this assignment, consider the unit circle centered at the
    origin. The top half of this circle can be written analytically as
    y = sqrt(1-x*x) for x between -1.0 and 1.0. What is the area of this
    semicircle?  Write a sequential program to estimate this area by performing
    numerical integration, using an approach similar to the one in the
    sequential program given to you. How small does the step size h have to be
    for your answer to be within 1% of the actual value? You should estimate
    this using experimentation.
    What to turn in:
      - Your sequential code and the value of h you found experimentally.
  - Modify this sequential code as follows to compute the estimate for pi in
    parallel using pthreads. Your code should create some number of threads and
    divide the responsibility for performing the numerical integration between
    these threads. You can use the round-robin assignments of points in the code
    I showed you in class. Whenever a thread computes a value, it should add it
    directly to the global variable pi without any synchronization.
    What to turn in:
      - Find the running times (of only computing pi) for one, two, four and
        eight threads and plot the running times and speedups you observe. What
        values are computed by your code for different numbers of threads? Why
        would you expect that these values not to be accurate estimates of pi?
  - In this part of the assignment, you will study the effect of true-sharing on
    performance. Modify the code in the previous part by using a pthread mutex
    to ensure that the global variable pi is updated atomically.
    What to turn in:
      - Find the running times (of only computing pi) for one, two, four and
        eight threads and plot the running times and speedups you observe. What
        value of pi is computed by your code when it is run on 8 threads?
  - You can avoid the mutex in the previous part by using atomic instructions to
    add contributions from threads to the global variable pi. C++ provides a
    rich set of atomic instructions for this purpose. Here is one way to use
    them for your numerical integration program. The code below creates an
    object pi that contains a field of type double on which atomic operations
    can be performed. This field is initialized to 0, and its value can be read
    using method load(). The routine add_to_pi atomically adds the value passed
    to it to this field. You should read the definition of compare_exchange_weak
    to make sure you understand how it works. The while loop iterates until
    this operation succeeds. Use this approach to implement the numerical
    integration routine in a lock-free manner.
    What to turn in:
      - As before, find the running times (of only computing pi) for one, two,
        four and eight threads and plot the running times and speedups you
        observe. Do you see any improvements in running times compared to the
        previous part in which you used mutexes? How about speedups? Explain
        your answers briefly. What value of pi is computed by your code when it
        is run on 8 threads?

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------                                                        
std::atomic<double> pi{0.0};

void add_to_pi(double bar) {
  auto current = pi.load();
  while (!pi.compare_exchange_weak(current, current + bar));
}
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  - In this part of the assignment, you will study the effect of false-sharing
    on performance. Create a global array sum and have each thread t add its
    contribution directly into sum[t]. At the end, thread 0 can add the values
    in this array to produce the estimate for pi.
    What to turn in:
      - Find the running times (of only computing pi) for one, two, four and
        eight threads, and plot the running times and speedups you observe. What
        value of pi computed by your code when it is run on 8 threads?
  - In this part of the assignment, you will study the performance benefit of
    eliminating both true-sharing and false-sharing. Run the code given in class
    in which each thread has a local variable in which it keeps its running sum,
    and then writes its final contribution to the sum array. At the end, thread
    0 adds up the values in the array to produce the estimate for pi.
    What to turn in:
      - Find the running times (of only computing pi) for one, two, four and
        eight threads, and plot the running times and speedups you observe. What
        value of pi is computed by your code when it is run on 8 threads?
  - The code used in the previous part used pthread_join. Replace this with a
    barrier and run your code again.
    What to turn in:
      - Find the running times (of only computing pi) for one, two, four and
        eight threads, and plot the running times and speedups you observe. What
        value of pi is computed by your code when it is run on 8 threads?
  - Write a short summary of your results in the previous parts, using phrases
    like “atomic operations,” "true-sharing," and "false-sharing" in your
    explanation.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Notes:

When you compute speedup for numerical integration, the numerator should be the
running time of the serial code, and the denominator should be the running time
of the parallel code on however many threads you used. The speedup will be
different for different numbers of threads. Note that the running time of the
serial code may be different from the running time of your parallel code running
on one thread because of the overhead of synchronization in the parallel code
even when it is running on one thread.